Right. Are we
all there?
Not quite.
Just waiting on Simon Court. Here he is.
Good.
Good to go, Mr. Chair.
Okay, thank you.
Right. Um, Liam.
Yes.
Who have we got first up then?
Uh, Michael Ford from Manawatū District Council.
Okay. Oh, right, great stuff. Okay. Michael, are you there?
He's just coming in now. I've just invited him.
Okay,
cool. Yep.
Mr. Chair, can you just confirm your members are present?
I can only see you at the moment, which is the function of the
dev-
I, I can see Simon Court, Carlos Chan-
Yeah.
Andy Foster, myself.
I can't see Carlos. I can see that he's
...
Carlos, yeah.
Carlos, you there? I can see Carlos. Yeah, all good. Yep, we've got everyone there.
Thank you, Tracy. Right, okay. Can we see you,
Michael?
Uh, Michael just needs to accept the promotion to be a panelist. We'll try again.
Here he comes.
You know, this would all be so much easier if, leave were granted on Thursdays
when we were in sitting times to, actually meet.
Well, you don't have to go into urgency.
Just making the point. It's not urgency, it's just extended hours.
Mm-hmm. Well, same thing.
But just, just make the point it'd be so much easier. Right.
We wouldn't be shuffling around between devices.
It's your, your call, not ours.
Well, it's not our call, sadly, but never mind.
And also, we might need to speak in the house, so it's no
good.
Well, maybe. Maybe.
Well, welcome Michael.
Michael.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know if you can see me,
but, um-
Can't, can't see you.
I
can hear you. Can you hear me?
Uh, yes, loud and clear.
Can, can you hear me?
Yes.
Okay. Well, I'm not sure why the ca- the
camera's not working. It seems to be, but,
I think I should con- make a start.
Yeah.
Shall I?
Okay, look, let's, let's get, let's get going. I'll give you the usual story.
Um, we've got you there for 10 minutes.
Um-
Right. Can, can you hear me?
Yes. Can you, can you hear me, folks?
Yeah, okay. So Michael, you should be able to hear us.
Yes.
We can hear you.
Loud and clear.
Yeah. Okay. So you've got 10 minutes, 10 minutes-
All right
... starting from now.
Thanks very much. Look, good morning, Chair, Andy Foster, and members of the
...
and,
and members of the select committee.
I'm Michael Ford, the mayor of Manawatū
District.
And I thank you for this opportunity.
I'll take out a moment-
Um, Michael
... and just comment on-
Michael
... one or two points.
Michael.
Um-
Michael
... Manawatū Council and community is very supportive of this bill.
Better.
It affects us greatly. Uh, we've been
advocating for years for legislation that
better balances proportional risk to human life with
affordability. Yes.
Yes. Yes?
No, you ... Michael, it's just you're coming and going a little bit, but it was
getting better then.
Okay.
As soon as I stopped, I'm trying to ask you.
Can you hear me?
Yeah. No, keep going.
Can you tell?
Yes. Keep going.
All right. I'll carry on. Um, thank
you. Uh, so yeah, we've been, we've been advocating for
years. Uh, we
ran the real risk that Fielding, our most, our most
earthquake.
We're in a high risk zone and have had short time frames to
strengthen or
demolish.
Our main town is Fielding, with a population of 18,000
people.
Fielding is 20 kilometers away from Palmerston North,
and as such, has a much smaller town center
than towns with similar
population
further from a major city.
We don't have a major state highway running through our
town center. There are likely more people and
vehicles along the footpath
...
Mi- Michael.
Roads of-
Michael. Michael, you ... It's really breaking
up. I think what we might do is to have another crack
at this, shortly, colleagues.
Is
just time?
Yeah. Yeah, M- Michael.Can we, can we get you
back on? I, I don't know where you are in terms of, in terms of reception,
but it's not very good and you're breaking up a lot.
Oh, Mr. Chair.
Yes.
Can we just ask the submitter to use the phone calling, call
one? Maybe it's easier.
Liam, can we do that?
Uh, yeah. We can send some details to the submitter.
Okay. Michael, what, what we'll do is if we can get you back
on, later on this morning, then we'll do that
in a way which we can actually hear you, because you're breaking up a
lot.
Did you hear that, Michael?
I think we might have lost him entirely anyway.
Uh, Liam, is, is Michael still there?
Uh, he is still there, but I haven't heard anything come through either, so...
Okay. Look, can you, can you liaise with Michael and we will, we will find
another time for him, and we'll try, just try and do it in a way that we can
actually hear him and it's not breaking up all the time.
Yes. We'll bring the next submitter in now.
Okay. That would be great. Thank
you.
Good morning. Morning. I, I hope I have better signal than the
previous speaker.
Well, yes, you're sounding better. Yeah. Okay.
Cool.
Soran. No, Santiago. Sorry. My
apologies. Okay. Right. Um, we've got you down for,
check Liam, is this ten minutes?
Yes, that's right.
Okay, ten minutes. I'll give you a call with about four to go.
Um, and, you can take your submission as
read. Uh, but if you wish to, highlight any
points, that's great. So we... I, I'll start your time now.
Thank you very much. I have some slides that are not, necessarily
required, but, they, they could
help. Um,
the first point I'd like to make is,
here representing QuakeCoRE, Centre
of Research Excellence, funded by
TEC, and our main goal is to improve
earthquake resilience
in Aotearoa, New Zealand. Uh, we're a large
organization with more than 150 researchers,
and affiliates, and as many students.
So I have the challenge to try to communicate the ideas of this big community
in a few, brief points. The
first one I like to make
is that, we think the bill shouldn't restrict
TAs to identify the most vulnerable
buildings out there. The bill is right in that it
targets the worst of the worst, and that's quite
welcome because, what we had was leading to
inaction. Uh,
but
the bill shouldn't restrict the ability of TAs to
identify some of these, worst
buildings, namely URM, unreinforced
masonry, and multi-story
pre-1976 concrete buildings
after, roughly,
2027. There's a clause, clause
number 133i (1) , that would
restrict a TA from identifying some of these buildings, and
I'll come back to that point because I want to emphasize
it. Um,
but in the meantime, let me also mention
that, we think the government has to lead by
example and, and the best way to do that is to address,
critical buildings,
buildings that are important for emergency response,
such as hospitals and, fire stations.
Uh, school buildings are also key
and, and the bill sort of de-emphasizes what's going on in that
space. Uh, in fact, the, parliament paper
that came out before the bill sort of makes, the point
that fewer of such buildings are going to be addressed
with the bill,
but somehow, that doesn't come through in the bill.
Oh, I see I got a text that says I can use my slides, so let me
switch to that. Uh, if I choose the right
screen. You should be seeing my slides, and I'm trying
to make here
the second point, that, there should be more emphasis on buildings
that are critical for emergency response or at least, there should
be some effort to clarify what's going to be done to address such
buildings. Uh, the next point I'd like to
make is that, in the new,
methodology and, and, and the new regulation, there are
very different types of retrofits that would be
mandated. Um, going all the way from
just fixing a facade in a URM building to doing what the bill
calls full retrofit, which is much more
comprehensive. Well, as it stands, the time
frames that are given to achieve those very different
types of retrofits with very different scopes are the same.
That doesn't make sense to us. We think that it would take much less time to fix
a facade than it would take to fix an entire building,
so the, time frame should be tiered depending on the
scope. And related to that,
and I'm gonna, sort of condense two points into one
here, there should be some effort to improve the
terminology in the bill,
and that should go together with a, sort of clarification or,
or informational campaign.And I'll give two
examples here. Uh, to say that
Auckland has low
risk, it's, it's misleading and a little bit,
counterproductive. See, Auckland and,
and the Northland might have lower
hazard, but because of the density
of the, built environment there in, in...
You could argue it has
a higher risk. And,
low, it's, it's, it should be put in relative terms.
It's the hazard
in the north is lower than in other regions, but not necessarily
low, especially if you consider sort of what happens,
internationally.
And last but not least, the
national and international evidence shows
that, mandatory measures only go so
far unless there are some, some
incentives, usually, financial incentives
in the form of lower taxes or
access to low interest rates. Uh, 'cause otherwise it
might be very difficult for people to,
act. I see there is a question.
Yeah, we'll deal with questions when you're finished.
Okay, great.
You've got, you've got about, um...
We're almo- coming up five and a half minutes at the moment.
Yeah.
Thank you. So I'd like to go back to that first point because, we
believe it's quite important. Uh, I'm sure
everyone here remembers this building, the Pine Gold
Corporation building or PGC building that, caused the
tragic death of 18 people in twenty eleven.
This is sort of the type of building we are
after, other than URM buildings. This is a
reinforced concrete building, a multi-story built
before 1976. And as late as
2007,
the building was classified to have a percent NBS of two-thirds,
sixty-seven percent. And
this quote, which was extracted from the Royal Commission report,
again, as late as 2007, said the building
wasn't earthquake prone. And in fact, the report goes
on to quote, that, the building was
expected to behave well.
And we're trying to make this point here to show that
the methods that were being used to classify buildings
before the Canterbury earthquakes and
before changes that were made in 2017,
that didn't always work. Uh, at least they didn't always produce consistent
results. And that's one of the reasons why we're introducing
a new methodology. Uh, so
clause, again, one thirty-three
i (1) -
You've got about three minutes left.
Yeah. Clause one thirty-three i (1)
restricts TAs who may come into or, or come
across buildings like this
to address them after twenty twenty-seven or after
the, time frames expire. Uh,
and that we think is problematic. We think the
TAs should have the opportunity to address,
buildings a-as bad as this one
in case they run into them, whether, it's, through a
consent request or, a
review triggered maybe by a change in use, and so
on. And I think I have two minutes left, so I'm gonna
leave those, to try to answer questions.
Uh, look, thank you. Really appreciate that.
So, colleagues, are there any questions?
Celia.
Jura, thank you for a very interesting submission.
I had two questions about things that...
You're very clear about your recommendations.
Um, any view on the change to
Dunedin's status? You mentioned Auckland,
and I don't see much commentary about apartment buildings.
I wondered if you had any thoughts on either of those
points.
Yeah. For Dunedin, I personally think, the change is,
quite timely. Uh, there is evidence that
there are faults south of Dunedin,
m- sort of oriented towards Dunedin, creating
a, a situation not too different from what, happened here in
Christchurch
in twenty eleven. So I, I think, I think Dunedin in a
way is overdue for, retrofit, urgent
retrofit. And then in terms of apartment buildings,
yeah, they should be a main concern, especially
because it may be very difficult for apartment owners
to agree on how to act to retrofit an entire
building. Uh, we're doing a lot of research to try to
find efficient ways to retrofit, ways to minimize
disruption, because it's
precisely the concern that you, you don't want tenants or,
owners to have to evacuate for long periods of time.
It should be a priority.
Okay. Um,
just check. Uh, any other last question,
anybody?
Uh, if, if other questions come up, please send
me, um-
We, we, we will do that. Look, can I ask just one very quick one?
Of course.
Just with respect to the, the PGG building that you talk about.
So I'm presuming what you were referring to is the, what's referred to as the
anytime pathway and just making sure that that is not too difficult for
TAs-
Right
... to pick, to pick things up. But what we've been told is that the problem's been
that, councils have been tending to pick up, being very risk averse and picking
up all sorts of buildings which are probably relatively ro- low risk.
So we've got to try and get that right. Is that what you're saying?
Yeah, the, you have to sort of strike the right balance there.
But in, in my mind, that any time pathway should,
also be allowed for these older buildings which are the, the most
vulnerable, the, the, the ones that worry us the most.
Uh, right now it, it would be open only for newer buildings and, in my mind,
doesn't make a whole lot ... that doesn't make a whole lot of sense.
Okay, look, we really appreciate that, so thank you very much for all the detailed
submission.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. Right. Uh, we go to Zoran
Rakovic.
Zoran, are you there? And-
Zoran's are on through now.
Okay. Liam, can you just tell us who else is, in the meeting room at the
moment,
in terms of moving on to next?
Uh, after that we have Suwen Ong and Ekomos
NZ.
Right, okay. So everybody's in the meeting room.
Yes. And we'll see if we can get, Michael Foreback.
Michael Foreback. That would be great. Brilliant. Okay, thank you.
Right, Zoran, are you there?
Uh, yes. Good morning.
Good morning. Uh-
Good morning
... welcome. Welcome. We've got you down for five minutes.
I'll give you a call with, about two minutes to go.
Um, we've got your submission, you can take that as read.
Um, but, your time starts
now.
Uh, thank you, chair and members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak. Uh, my name is Zoran Rakovic.
I'm a retired structural engineer.
I support the direction this bill is
taking, but w- I would like to make four practical
recommendations.
First one is related to percent MBS rating.
It's been with us engineers, councils, building owners,
and banks, lenders, and others for quite some
time now, and just abruptly ending it, I think could
cause some, discomfort. And what I'm
proposing is that we keep that in parallel with the new, new grading system
for a limited period of time, maybe three to five years, so people get
used to new grading. I'm pretty sure that, if we
drop it immediately,
clients would start asking, "Oh, how does that compare with MBS?" And we would be
doing that in parallel anyway. Uh, second, when we do
seismic retrofit of buildings, we usually or
sometimes add columns, braces, thicken
walls, and thing... do things that could affect fire
rating or fire escape routes. Um, I
therefore recommend that instead of just, completely
abandoning fire engineering check, we do one before
the retrofit is done, and then do
fire engineering checks during design or when the building's
completed just to make sure that none of these new elements
have, altered fire escape routes or fire rating.
Sometimes our elements penetrate through firewalls
or, or, connect to fire-rated elements and that, that needs
to be looked at.
I also believe that, many of these, older and
vulnerable buildings are owned by people or
companies, with, limited funds
or, or limited cash flow. What I'm proposing is
that,
consenting for retrofit is done once,
but owners all- are allowed to do, sensible
staging of the building works so they
can deliver it in a, in a more
friendly, cash flow friendly manner.
Um, my recommendation is that the council gives one consent, but then
gives code compliance certificate for each stage
completed. Uh, I also
believe that, there's need for a better communication
between building owners who, a- are, responsible
for the building, a- and,
and the tenants,
communities that use the buildings so that those people who are actually
affected by the building's earthquake performance are kept
informed as to what's happening, whether a retrofit's gonna
be done, and, and the timing of such works.
In summary, I support the bill, and these are my four recommendations.
Thank, thank you for your time and opportunity to speak.
Look, thank you, Zoran. Very, very useful.
Um, in terms of questions, I'll ask two quick ones and if anybody else has
got one, that'd be great. So with, with respect to the second recommendation you
had about, fire walls, et cetera, essentially you're just
saying, "Don't ma- just make sure you don't make it worse." Where if the build
doesn't require you upgrading, but at least you should have an obligation to make
sure it doesn't make the fire safety
worse.
Uh, well, I'm not a fire engineer. I believe that's the intent of the
bill.
Yeah.
And, you know, I cannot commend ...
co- comment on the merit of that, but what I ca-
the, the idea is that don't forget that building works, seismic
building works could affect fire rating, and if that's the intent of the
build, then a check needs to be done.
Okay. That's, that's, that's clear.
Uh, the second one is, that you talked about the consenting being done
once, but then allowing for owners to do the work in stages if they
chose. Um, is that not normally the case
now? Or the, or the consents, the consents lapse and, you
know, you've done part of it or, is it just too difficult at the moment?
Uh, I think it's too difficult at the moment.
Normally, from my experience of,
retrofitting buildings, you get a consent and you've got to do it in one
go. Uh, there is no,
there is no e- e- act, the building act does not have a built-in
staging allowance, and if you build it into this
bill or this, yeah, amendment, I think it could
help owners have some, something to talk
about with the councils.
Okay. That's useful.
And also-
See, very quick, very quick question.
Yep.
I beg your pardon?
You're, you're on mute.
Who, me?
No, no, no. No, Celier is.
Sorry. Sorry.
Right.
Um, it's also on the fire area. The fire safety
assessment before and after, would you, expect those to be
lodged on the, the building information
memorandum at the council?
Uh, how I would approach it is I would get the fire
engineer to do assessment of the building before I start my
design, and then as I develop my design, I would check
it with the fire engineer that I'm not affecting anything.
And when the consent is lodged, that's when the f- second
fire report would be included to demonstrate to the council that no, no,
adverse effect is, you know,
that there is no adverse effect on fire-
That's-
Zoran, thank you very much. We really appreciate it.
So thank you for some very clear-
Okay
... suggestions.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Okay.
Thanks.
Now we've got, Su Wen Ong.
Su?
Su Wen, are you
there?
Liam, we've got Su Wen.
Yeah. Su Wen just needs to unmute and, turn the, camera on.
She's
un-unmuting now.
Su Wen, welcome.
Can you unmute, please?
You're still on
mute.
Okay. Right, Su Wen. Thank you. Uh, we've got your submission, which you can take
as read. Um,
we've got you down for five minutes, so if you want to highlight any key
points, and, well, I mean, you've obviously made one very key point, then,
please do, and I'll give you a call with about two minutes to go.
If, we can leave some time for questions, it will be great.
So your time starts
now.
Su,
we can't hear you. I'll stop the, I'll stop
the clock.
Are you, are you ... Is this a, a thing if you got your volume down at zero
or?
Have a look at your volume, either your settings or your, or your volume on
your-
Uh, Mr. Chair, if, if you wanna give Su Wen a moment to sort out the audio issue,
we do have Michael Ford back if you wanted to go to them.
Okay. Su Wen, what we'll do is we'll let you sort your, audio out.
We'll, we'll come back to you with the full five minutes, momentarily when
that- we've got that sorted, and we'll go to one of the other submitters.
Okay. Michael.
Just bring Michael through again now.
Okay. Right. Thank you.
Michael, welcome back.
Thank you.
And we can see you as well.
My goodness, that's a, that's a shock for you.
Hey, lovely to see you again. Um, we'll start your, we'll start your time from
scratch, because we really, you know, it was, really
c-cutting in and out. Um, and so, you can take it as, you
know, normal rules. You take everything as read and, in your
time.
Oh, thank, thanks very much, and apologies for the technology.
Oh, it happens.
I'll just make it o- call it operator error.
Um,
so good morning again, Chair, Andy Foster and the, and members of the
Select Committee. I'm Michael Ford, Mayor of Manawatu, and I thank you for this
opportunity. Take our submission as read and just comment on one or two
points. The Manawatu Council and community is very supportive
of this bill. Uh, we've been advocating for many years for
legislation that better balances proportional risk to human life with
affordability, and we ran the real risk that Fielding's most attractive town
center would be destroyed by legislation or policy rather than an
earthquake. We are in a high risk zone and have had
short timeframes to strengthen or demolish.
Our main town is Fielding. It has a population of eighteen thousand.
Fielding is only twenty kilometers from Palmerston North, and as such, has a
much smaller town center than towns with, similar
populations further from a major city.
And we don't have a major state highway running through our town center.
There are likely more people in vehicles on the footpaths and towns of,
such places as Taihape and Dannevirke, which are more standalone towns
on major state highways, but with populations under ten
thousand. This means that owners of Fielding's unreinforced,
reinforced
masonry buildings, which make up a significant percentage of our town
center, have to secure facades, and the towns with smaller
populations don't. Our council accepts this,
but is looking for comparative relief in terms of timeframes.
We don't wanna be hit with a double whammy by comparison with similar but smaller
towns. Standard templates for engineering solutions to secure
facades would be very helpful, similar to what we understand was
available in Wellington, the Hutt Valley, Kaikoura, et cetera, after the
Kaikoura earthquake, albeit with considerable
funding.Before Minister Chris Pink's extensions, Fielding
building owners had until March two thousand and twenty-eight.
It's only two years away to strengthen or demolish the priority buildings which
are most of the town center unreinforced masonry buildings.
This is because our council established priority thoroughfares, unwisely in
my opinion, some years ago, which reduced the timeframe from fifteen
years to seven and a half years to strengthen or demolish.
Twelve buildings have been strengthened, which is good, which were the low-hanging
fruit. We're struggling with the others.
We now have until March two thousand and thirty-two, whereas towns without priority
thoroughfares have at least another seven and a half years.
We're aware of the proposal to give councils discretion to extend the timeframe,
which we support, but we just want a more level playing field.
What would help would be a clear interpretation of what sufficient vehicle or
pedestrian traffic to warrant prioritization means.
What does the word sufficient mean?
A particular pedestrian count or traffic count would be
helpful, and I refer you to the bottom of, of our
submission pages, bottom of page nine, ten, eleven, and the
top of page twelve. Um, we would like to revisit
priority thoroughfares and be able to reissue earthquake-prone building
notices, building notices with revised remediation
timeframes, and we would welcome the removal of the difference in
timeframes between priority buildings and non-priority buildings in
relatively small towns such as ours.
We're not gonna comment on the larger cities.
We're just wanting to be the same, the same timeframes as our
neighbors. Thank you for this opportunity.
Michael, thank you very much. Um, questions,
colleagues.
Can I ask you one, Michael? I mean, you've, you've invited us to,
to measure the size of towns quite differently and also to
have another think about,
clarity around, pedestrian and traffic counts.
Do you have any thoughts about the practicalities of doing that in a way
which was robust? Because whatever methodology you use,
it's gonna affect building owners.
Um, you're either in or you're out, you know, you're on one side of a line or
not on one si- or on the other side of a line.
Um, that's quite, important thing, so it needs to be a robust, a very robust
regime.
Yeah, look-
Got, got any thoughts about that?
In, in terms of the, the larger population or the ten thousand
threshold, we're, we're just accepting that, but we're just point-pointing
out, that we are probably, even though we've got eighteen thousand
people, we probably, have as many people in our town centers as,
as, a lot s- smaller towns. What we're just looking
for is we really want to undo the priority
thoroughfare. Um, I mean, if we
could just
remove the difference in timeframes between,
those with priority thoroughfares and those that don't, or priority buildings and
those that don't, that would probably be all that we're looking for.
Was that not something that you said...
You said it was unwize, in your view, an unwise decision, but it was a decision
made by the council?
It, it was a decision of our, a previous council,
yes, and-
So is there anything to prevent that being the, the council review, revisiting
that decision?
Uh, well, the issue was more we... Well, up until now,
we weren't able to undo the, the building notices that were
sent. So yes, we could rescind that decision, but it
wasn't going to affect the building notices that were sent.
And so we're wanting to ensure that whatever we do, we can actually change
the, the actual timeframes that building owners have been given.
Um, and one way of doing that would be if the legislation just removed the
difference in timeframe between, those with
pri-priority build, or the priority buildings and
non-priority buildings.
Okay. That's, that, that's helpful to understand that. Right.
Any other questions, colleagues?
I can't see any hands up.
No, Michael, I think that's, that's very helpful, and it's given us a, a little
thing to think about there.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thanks for the opportunity.
And, and Fielding is often the poster child for, these, these issues around
seismic,
seismic discussions.
Thank you very much.
So point to well made. Thank you.
Okay. Bye-bye.
Right. We'll go back to Su Wen Ong, if we've got the
technology working there.
We'll try bringing Su Wen on again.
Okay. Thank
you.
Have
we got Su Wen yet? Oh, yes, I see you there. Okay. Right.
We'll have another go this time, Su Wen.
Hopefully, the technology will work for you.
Um, you're on, you're on mute at the moment, so we'll take...
If we can take the mute off, then hopefully we've got the
volume.
You're
still on mute, Su
Wen.
Okay. I think... Can we try it, can we try it by phone,
Liam? How do... Uh, can you make that work for us?
Yes, we'll send Su Wen the, the dial-in details.
Did you wanna move to Akamos, in the meantime?
I think, I think we'll do that, yes.
Su Wen, what, what we're gonna do is move to another submitter and, our staff
will give you a call and, and we'll do it by
phone.Okay? Right,
okay, we'll, we'll put ICOMOS on
then.
Right. Have we got ICOMOS there?
Chessa?
Good morning.
Good morning. We can hear you loud and clear, that's great.
Excellent .
Okay, so
good, we've been having a few technical problems.
So, right, okay, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, you can take your submission as read, and thank you for all the work and
the expertise that you bring to this, this issue.
Um, and I'll give you a call with about four minutes to go in terms of leaving some
time for questions, so, over to you.
Okay, great. Stacy's gonna kick us off.
Sure. Thank you very much-
Hi, Stacy
... Kia ora. Uh, kia ora, Andy. Um, to the
chair, and also to the virtual audience, I'm Stacy
Vallis, the present chair of ICOMOS Aotearoa New Zealand, and a
lecturer in architecture, and I'm here this morning with my team, including
Chessa, the chair of our legislation and policy team,
and, and, and a heritage conservation
architect. So ICOMOS is a non-governmental,
organization focused on the
heritage conservation of the world's monuments and sites.
Founded in 1965, ICOMOS is a principal advisor to
UNESCO, and includes over 10,000 members in
132 nations, spread
across the globe. The ICOMOS New Zealand charter
is the benchmark for heritage conservation standards and practice
in, Aotearoa New Zealand. So this morning
we'd like to thank you for taking the time to read our submission, and
also offering us the chance to share some feedback on the draft
bill.
We note that the purpose of the bill is to set up a
more proportionist and risk-based regulatory
system for managing our earthquake-prone buildings.
So of interest to us are the ways in which the bills, the, the bill
will impact the owners, occupiers, and communities with
an interest, in these heritage buildings and structures.
So I'll now hand over, to my team, to Chessa, to run us through a few of our
key points.
So as an organization, ICOMOS Aotearoa New Zealand supports
removing the current method of identifying and assessing earthquake-prone
buildings based on the extent to which they have to achieve the new building
standard or percent MBS, and the underpi- underpinning initial
evaluation procedure, or IEP, that is used to calculate
this. Uh, for reasons that are highlighted in our submission,
we believe the current system has led to inaccurate or unnecessarily
pessimistic ratings, particularly for historic
buildings.
We support the tiered mitigation requirements proposed that will target
retrofitting and/or remove the need to retrofit some building
types, as we agree that this will better reflect the actual level of
risk of individual buildings and will be more cost effective.
We support removing the requirement to comply with Section 112
provisions of the Building Act relating to means of escape from fire and
accessibility as nearly as reasonably practicable, because
we agree that this will reduce the cost.
However, this does not mean that any implications of strengthening on a building's
existing fire safety or accessibility provisions should be
ignored, rather that a basic requirement not to make the existing
provisions worse may be implemented without any need for additional
upgrading. Lastly, we support
enabling territorial authorities to grant deadline extensions for seismic
works to ensure that building owners have sufficient time to carry out
remediation. Uh, notwithstanding that overall
we do support the bill, ICOMOS Aotearoa New Zealand have some
concerns, which Stacy will now run you through.
Thanks. So we would like to note
that the proposed, reassignment of coastal
Otago and Dunedin and part of Stewart Island from a low
seismic risk to a medium seismic zone will impact a significant
number of heritage buildings, particularly masonry
buildings. Even with the proposed tiered approach, many
heritage buildings will still be impacted, and these buildings will
need bespoke solutions. So we'd like to
strongly promote that specific guidance for heritage buildings be
prepared by experts in historic building conservation,
and that they are made available by organizations, including
Heritage New Zealand Māori Tānga, MBIE, and
TAs.
Furthermore, the provision of financial support
to building owners in the form of grants or similar would also help speed
up the rate at which the works that will still be required by the bill
take place, and this will aid the building
owners as well as the centers in which the buildings are located, and
also s- help support wider national economic
growth. So we'd like to strongly promote
the, the, reinstatement of the Heritage Equip Fund,
which is, which had supported the strengthening of multiple
heritage buildings and the investigation and design work that
informs strengthening, as well as
providing increased funding to and by,
TAs and Heritage New Zealand to allow them to create or
increase financial grants and/or relief programs for strengthening
heritage buildings. So I'll now hand over to Chessa to close us off.
Thanks, Chessa.
So further to that, while we acknowledge that government regulation of
the insurance industry is not within the scope of this bill, we are concerned that
insurance premiums for buildings previously identified as earthquake prone
or assigned low percentage MBS ratings will remain
high.This increases the importance of the government provision
of financial support through grants, et cetera, to offset some of the ongoing
financial burden that insurance places on building owners.
Thank you so much for hearing our submission today.
Um, we're happy now to take some questions.
Thank you very much. We'll start off with Celia.
Mute
again.
Sorry to hold you up.
There you go.
Um, thank you Chessa and Stacy. I've got three quick
questions. Um, the quantum of the Heritage
Equip Fund, do you have any thoughts as to
what's actually needed there?
Uh, we've not done a comprehensive review of that, but that's a very good question.
Um, we do have some research going on in the background of, in
the organization, working through some m- issues of
funding and support. Uh, so we would have a better idea of
that when we've done some more of that research.
But certainly to reinstate as a minimum the fund that had been
available previously would be extremely helpful.
Thank you. Um, a couple more quickly.
The extension of time, did you have views on how
long that should be ru- I mean, 'cause otherwise you don't want it every five
years being renewed for another five years.
No, that's true, and of course we don't want to end up in a situation of demolition
by neglect either, which is a, a really critical issue on the
flip side for, for heritage buildings.
Um, i- it's difficult because I think each one is probably a case by case
basis, but I would've, I would've suggested, and I think the organization would
support this, that it would be, you would only
get one, perhaps two extensions, and they would be small for a certain
period of years. And they would be based on what the owner can
demonstrate they may need the extra time for, so they have a timeframe
in which they can procure the funding that's needed to do the work.
Thank you. That's helpful. Uh, living in the Wairarapa where the Masterton Town
Hall has just been demolished, it's obviously-
Oh, I do too. I'm in Greytown, so.
Oh, okay. Yes.
Very good. Okay, all the Wairarapa rights here.
We have a Wairarapa majority, I think, today.
We- happy, happy unite.
Thank you.
Okay. Um, thanks. Any other questions, team?
Look, can I just ask one, Chessa, and that is,
coastal Otago.
Mm-hmm.
Just, when you've suggested effectively an advisory, arrangement
plus, you know, re-restoring equip.
Um, there's a lot of enormously valuable, heritage in both
Dunedin and, and Ōāmaru in particular.
Absolutely.
Um, you know, what other thoughts do you have about how we get through this?
And obviously there's a bit of contest in terms of some of the advice that we've
had too in terms of actually how seismically challenged
the area is.
Certainly, and, and we're aware that, that our, our expertise does not
lie in the area of, of geotechnics and earthquake science.
So we, we can't come from the position where we can necessarily
criticize the, the proposed change in the, in the
zone. Um, so from our perspective, the
most important thing is to ensure that if
we are going to get an increase in number of
v- very important heritage buildings in critical parts of the country such as
Dunedin and Ōāmaru, we have also,
surrounding areas of Otago to include in that as well,
that there, that there is financial support available to
building owners, particularly where they haven't necessarily previously been
identified as earthquake prone. And the other thing that we've recommended
around guidance for, specifically for heritage
buildings is something else that would help to
achieve, positive outcomes without
placing the additional stress of having intricate
design solutions developed by engineers and
architects for these buildings. If there is a way that they can
circumvent a lengthy design process and achieve an
outcome with some solutions that directly relate to
historic methods of construction, then that will be of assistance as
well.
Uh, thank you. And look, the other, the other side, flip side of the question,
is that, Auckland being proposed to be pulled out, but we've had quite a
number of submitters saying, "Well, actually there are still risks, particularly
in, you know, high density foot traffic areas with,
URM buildings," which by and large many of them will be on the heritage
lists. Um, any thoughts about whether in fact it would still
be wise to do something with those buildings and, at least tie back,
facades?
Certainly, it's a, a very, a basic level of facade pinning and
parapet pinning is, is a good idea for those buildings.
I don't see any particular reason though why changing the system
w- means that owners wouldn't undertake
that work. It just removes a certain impetus for them to do
so. Again, if funding were provided, then
I imagine more building owners would take up the opportunity to access that
funding and undertake that work.
Okay. Look, thank you. That's really appreciated.
Okay, I don't see any other questions, so thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. Thanks, Stacy.
Thank you.
Thanks, Chessa.
Okay. And now we'll go third time lucky, and I think we've got the technology
sorted out for Su Yin Ong.
Right. Is this gonna work this time?
Oh, that's brilliant. Well done. Well done.
Great news.
Good stuff. Okay. Look, well done.
Thank you-
Sorry for all that.
Thank... Look, thank you for keeping on working together with us.
Uh, and, we've got there. That's brilliant.
Uh, so we've got you down for five minutes.
I'll give you a call with about two to go.
Um, so any key points you wanna make, we can see what the key point is
in your submission. Um, and then, we'll look forward to some
questions
Okay, thanks everyone. Um, my point is really to
support all the p- the points... Well, one of the
points made by various... Well, not various.
All the engineering
submissions put in by, Sir Becker, by
Holmes, by the Society of, you
know, Earthquake Engineers, the structural engineers,
Professor Pujol before, Dr Richard Sharp before,
and they've all said, y-you know, without exception,
that
it's not credible to leave out Auckland.
Um, and they all said why. They all mentioned that,
the hazard, or which I prefer to call
probability because I deal more with statistics, is not
zero
and it's, it's... Yeah, and as, Professor Pujol
pointed out just before, that
Auckland is lower than Wellington
in New Zealand standards, but not by world standards.
And the other point made by Dr Richard Sharp was that
because the loading in Auckland is less than in Wellington,
even pre-previous codes have had that,
the buildings in Auckland are built to a lower
standard. Therefore, the probability of
a, a collapse or, you know, a structural failure
in Auckland is actually the same in Auckland as it is in Wellington simply because
the buildings are, are weaker. Okay, that's point one.
The second point which nobody seems to have mentioned is that
the consequence of a failure in Auckland is
higher
than it is in smaller places, including Wellington.
I mean, Auckland is supposed to be the, you know, the
engine room of the New Zealand economy.
Imagine
what happens if, you know, various transport links are all brought
down and
the factories are all affected.
The... So although the probability of failure
is, is lower or actually the same,
the consequence, the cost, the economic cost is much higher
and I find it hard to understand how the minister and the
ministry could have
put in a bill that leaves Auckland off the system, and I
don't know if the select committee has the power to do that, but maybe you
should call the minister or... and his
officials to come and explain to you, and so that I can
listen and all us engineers can listen to what their reason was for
leaving out Auckland.
That's my only point, and I welcome any questions you may
have.
Thank you very much. That's very clear, and as was your submission.
We've got about two and a half minutes left.
Uh, any questions, colleagues?
Don't see any, so look, I'll, I'll just, just ask, ask the one.
Um,
do you... Have you given any thought, given what you've said, to how
we might go about doing it? I'm... And I certainly understand very well the point
you make about the building standards required in
Auckland are, are significantly lower than they are in, in the likes of Wellington
because it's a low risk zone, so the buildings are actually weaker anyway.
But do you have any suggestions about how we might go about
s- doing something which is recognizing that the risk is not zero,
without, too great an impost?
Um, simply move it back into,
um... Move it back into the low zone.
Um, in fact-
But it already is. It's proposed to be in a low zone.
Oh, okay. Um,
well then you should have more zones then.
I mean, it's fair enough to leave Chatham Islands off it, and it's probably
fair enough to leave Kaitaia. Um, it's
just that... So at the top of the, top of
the, you know, North Island and in Northland,
you... And given because it's a largely rural area, it's fair
enough to sort of say,
leave that off the system and maybe the Chathams Islands.
Um, I'm not really a seismic expert, I'm more of a
statistician, and I deal more with risk.
Um,
so maybe you should have four zones rather than three.
yeah. And, and the other, the other thing is that,
in terms of a risk approach, rather than sort of saying every building has five
years to, to upgrade or whatever,
or, you know, fix, the councils should be attacking
or the, the councils should be going after the, the
most... the riskiest buildings first.
Um,
so they should sort of say, "Okay. Which, which,
which buildings have the most exposure to foot traffic
or to,
affecting infrastructure, infrastructure links and transport links?"
Ra- And, and sort of go to those first rather than sort of say
maybe, an Anglican cathedral...
Sorry, Anglican church or Anglican cathedral in a small,
small- smaller rural place still within the local
territorial authority, because territorial authorities,
have, you know,
areas where lots of people
go past and-
I understand your point, yep. Yeah
... areas where comparatively few people go past.
And to sort of just go by territorial authority is a very blunt
instrument. It could be made, you know, a lot more
nuanced than that, I think.
Okay. Thank you. I will take one more question. Celia.
There, we found the unmute quickly.
Oh, well done.
Um, thank you very much for your submission.
I wondered if you had any comment on that,
time required to, remediate,
whether you wanted to include, buildings
that are important in emergency response.
And we've heard from other people, like hospitals, schools, fire stations.
I'd probably add Marae to that.
I... Totally. I mean, that was the first thing I underlined when I
read the bill, but,
you know, I, I always make my submissions based on one or two points,
and the Auckland point was so glaring that I, I devoted all my
energies to it and, and talk about it.
But yeah, I mean, if there's an emergency,
not much point in having an emergency, center
like a hospital that's collapsed.
I mean, that should be the place
where you should strengthen the most, and, and, the central
government. And to sort of opt out of this and, and use,
use the excuse of, "Oh, well, we've got other legislation," I mean, I don't think
that cuts it. Um,
that... Yeah. Personally, th- I
thought... I felt that that was penny, penny pinching sort of
thing.
Look, Su Wen, thank you very much. Our time is up.
Um, so look, we really appreciate the point you've made, and thank you again
for-
Yeah. Thank you for listening
... be-bearing with us in terms of getting the technology sorted, so.
Bearing with me. This is all my fault.
Oh, no.
Excellent.
It's all good. We got, we got there in the end. That's the key.
Okay. Bye.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay, colleagues, that takes us...
I think we're at the end of,
the oral submissions. Correct,
Liam?
Yes, that's right. Uh, committee's scheduled to move into private session.
Okay, so that's what we'll do now. So if we can flick from, public to private
session, that would be great. Thank
you.